all: Add support for write-only attributes (#1375)
hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk: website/docs/plugin/sdkv2/resources/write-only-attributes.mdx

---
page_title: Resources - Write-only Attributes
description: Implementing write-only attributes within resources.
---

# Resources - Write-only Attributes

~> **NOTE:** Write-only attributes are only supported in Terraform `v1.11` or higher

> Write-only attributes are managed resource attributes whose values are not saved to the Terraform plan or state artifacts. Write-only attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write-only attributes are managed resource attributes that are configured by practitioners but are not persisted to the Terraform plan or state artifacts. Write-only attributes
```

should be used to handle secret values that do not need to be persisted in Terraform state, such as passwords, API keys, etc.
The provider is expected to be the terminal point for an ephemeral value,

> which should either use the value by making the appropriate change to the API or ignore the value. Write-only attributes can accept [ephemeral values](/terraform/language/resources/ephemeral).

Reviewer: Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
which should either use the value by making the appropriate change to the API or ignore the value. Write-only attributes can accept [ephemeral values](/terraform/language/resources/ephemeral) and are not required to be consistent between plan and apply operations.
```

## General Concepts

> The following are high level differences between regular attributes and write-only attributes:

Reviewer: Perhaps instead of "regular", use language like "configuration" or just directly reference `Required` / `Optional` attributes. "Non-computed" is also a potential option

- Write-only attributes can accept ephemeral and non-ephemeral values

> - Write-only attribute values are only available in the configuration, and the prior state, planned state, and final state values for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Write-only attribute values are only available in the configuration. The prior state, planned state, and final state values for
```

write-only attributes should always be `null`.

>     - Provider developers do not need to “clean up” write-only attribute values after using them as the SDKv2 will handle the nullification of write-only attributes for all RPCs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Provider developers do not need to explicitly set write-only attribute values to `null` after using them as the SDKv2 will handle the nullification of write-only attributes for all RPCs.
```

> - Any value that is set for a write-only attribute using `(*ResourceData).Set()` by the provider will be set to `null` by SDKv2 before the RPC response is sent to Terraform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Any value that is set for a write-only attribute using `(*ResourceData).Set()` by the provider will be reverted to `null` by SDKv2 before the RPC response is sent to Terraform
```

> - Write-only attribute values on its own will never cause a Terraform diff.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Write-only attribute values cannot produce a Terraform plan difference.
```

    - This is because the prior state value for a write-only attribute will always be `null` and the planned/final state value will also be `null`, therefore, it cannot produce a diff on its own.
    - The one exception to this case is if the write-only attribute is added to `requires_replace` via [CustomizeDiff](/terraform/plugin/sdkv2/resources/customizing-differences), in that case, the write-only attribute will always cause a diff/trigger a resource recreation

- Since write-only attributes can accept ephemeral values, write-only attribute configuration values are not expected to be consistent between plan and apply.

## Schema Behavior

**Schema example:**

```go
"password_wo": {
  Type:     schema.TypeString,
  Required:  true,
  WriteOnly: true,
},
```

**Restrictions:**

- Cannot be used in data source or provider schemas.
- Must be set with either `Required` is `true` or `Optional` is `true`
- Cannot be used when `Computed` is `true`

> - Cannot be used with aggregate schema types (e.g. `typeMap`, `typeList`, `typeSet`)

Reviewer: Some considerations:
- Can't be used with `ForceNew`
- WriteOnly can't be set directly on an aggregate schema type, but it can be used within one (as long as it's not computed). We should make that distinction somewhere

All top level attributes or blocks can be referred to using `cty.GetAttrPath()`

```go
cty.GetAttrPath("top_level_schema_attribute")
```

Maps or map nested blocks can be traversed using `IndexString()`

```go
// Map traversal
cty.GetAttrPath("map_attribute").IndexString("key1")

// Map nested block traversal
cty.GetAttrPath("map_nested_block").IndexString("block1").getAttr("map_nested_block_attribute")

```

Lists or list nested blocks can be traversed using `IndexInt()`

```go
// List traversal
cty.GetAttrPath("list_attribute").IndexInt(0)

// List nested block traversal
cty.GetAttrPath("list_nested_block").IndexInt(1).getAttr("list_nested_block_attribute")
```

Sets or set nested blocks can be traversed using `Index()`. `Index()` takes in a `cty.Value` of the set element that you want to traverse into.

```go
// Set traversal
cty.GetAttrPath("set_attribute").Index(cty.String("set_string_val"))

// Set nested block traversal
cty.GetAttrPath("set_nested_block").
Index(cty.ObjectVal(map[string]cty.Value{"set_nested_block_attribute": cty.StringVal("valueA")}))
.GetAttr("set_nested_block_attribute") // returns path to cty.String("valueA")

> ```

Reviewer: This documentation is great! One potential consideration is maybe linking each `cty.Path` example to a Terraform config example. That might help make readers make the mental jump

### cty.Value

> When working with `cty.Value`, you must always check the type of the value before converting it to a Go value or else the conversion will cause a panic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with `cty.Value`, you must always check the type of the value before converting it to a Go value or else the conversion could cause a panic.
```

```go
// Check that the type is a cty.String before conversion
if !woVal.Type().Equals(cty.String) {
    return errors.New("error retrieving write-only attribute: password_wo - retrieved config value is not a string")
}

// Check if the value is not null
if !woVal.IsNull() {
    // Now we can safely convert to a Go string
    encryptedValue = woVal.AsString()
}
```

> ## PreferWriteOnly Validator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PreferWriteOnlyAttribute Validator
```

> `PreferWriteOnlyAttribute()` is a validator that takes a `cty.Path` to a regular attribute and a `cty.Path` to a write-only attribute.

Reviewer: Not sure on the wording, but just avoiding regular

```suggestion
`PreferWriteOnlyAttribute()` is a validator that takes a `cty.Path` to an existing configuration attribute (required/optional) and a `cty.Path` to a write-only attribute.
```

The validator returns a warning if the Terraform client is 1.11 or above and the value to the regular attribute is non-null.

Usage:

```go
func resourceDbInstance() *schema.Resource {
	return &schema.Resource{
		Create: resourceCreate,
		Read:   resourceRead,
		Delete: resourceDelete,
		Importer: &schema.ResourceImporter{
			State: resourceImport,
		},
		Schema: //omitted for brevity
		ValidateRawResourceConfigFuncs: []schema.ValidateRawResourceConfigFunc{
            validation.PreferWriteOnlyAttribute(cty.GetAttrPath("password"), cty.GetAttrPath("password_wo")),
		},
	}
}
```

```hcl
resource "example_db_instance" "ex" {
  username = "foo"
  password = "bar" # returns a warning encouraging practitioners to use `password_wo` instead.
}
```

When using `cty.Path` to traverse into a nested block, use an unknown value to indicate any key value:

- For lists: `cty.Index(cty.UnknownVal(cty.Number))`,
- For maps: `cty.Index(cty.UnknownVal(cty.String))`,
- For sets: `cty.Index(cty.UnknownVal(cty.Object(nil)))`,

## Best Practices

> Since write-only attributes have no prior values, we cannot determine user intent with a write-only attribute alone. To determine when to use/not use a write-only attribute value in your provider, we recommend using other attributes in the provider. For example:

Reviewer: Not sure the wording 🤔 

```suggestion
Since write-only attributes have no prior values, user intent cannot be determined with a write-only attribute alone. To determine when to use/not use a write-only attribute value in your provider, we recommend using other non-write-only attributes in the provider. For example:
```

> - Pair write-only attributes with a regular attribute to “trigger” the use of the write-only attribute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pair write-only attributes with a configuration attribute (required or optional) to “trigger” the use of the write-only attribute
```

>     - For example, a `password_wo` write-only attribute can be paired with a configured `password_wo_version` attribute. When the `password_wo_version` updates, the provider will send the `password_wo` value to the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - For example, a `password_wo` write-only attribute can be paired with a configured `password_wo_version` attribute. When the `password_wo_version` is modified, the provider will send the `password_wo` value to the API.
```
